Day-13-CloudRun-Secret-Manager-Secure-Configuration
Date: 30-Sep-2026

PROJECT: EMPLOYEE API

Today we made the Employee API on Cloud Run receive a sensitive value
from GCP Secret Manager. The deployment succeeded and the API returned
"api_key_configured": true without showing the actual secret.

WHAT I NEED TO REMEMBER

Sensitive values include passwords, API keys and tokens.
- Do not hardcode them in Python.
- Do not commit them in a .env file or any other source file.
- Do not copy them into a Docker image.

A local .env file can be used for development if it stays private and out
of Git and Docker builds. For today's Cloud Run setup, Secret Manager
stores the sensitive value.

HOW IT WORKS IN OUR PROJECT

1. GCP Secret Manager stores the secret named EMPLOYEE_API_KEY.
2. Cloud Run references version 1 of that secret.
3. Cloud Run exposes its value to the container as API_KEY.
4. Python reads the environment variable:

   import os
   api_key = os.getenv('API_KEY')

EMPLOYEE_API_KEY is the secret's name in GCP.
API_KEY is the environment variable name our Python code reads.
These are names, not the sensitive value itself.

Secret Manager -> Cloud Run environment variable API_KEY -> Python

JUST ENOUGH IAM FOR TODAY

IAM = who can do what in GCP.
Service account = the application's identity in GCP.
Secret Manager Secret Accessor = permission to read a secret's value.

For our project:
- Who? The service account running the Cloud Run application.
- Do what? Read EMPLOYEE_API_KEY.
- Permission? Secret Manager Secret Accessor.

You do not need to memorize the service account address or IAM commands.
Creating a secret and allowing an application to read it are separate steps.

THE PERMISSION ERROR AND FIX

The Cloud Run secret reference was configured, but creating the revision
failed with "Permission denied on secret" for EMPLOYEE_API_KEY version 1.
Routing traffic was cancelled. The error requested the Secret Manager
Secret Accessor role for the revision's service account.

Why: the application's identity did not yet have permission to read it.

Fix recorded in the conversation: grant that service account Secret
Manager Secret Accessor, allow time for the permission to take effect,
then deploy a new revision using the same secret reference.

After retrying, updating the service, creating the revision and routing
traffic all completed successfully.

FINAL RESULT

{
  "message": "Employee API",
  "version": "3.0",
  "environment": "staging",
  "api_key_configured": true
}

The flag reports that the application has its API key configured. It does
not display the key or test whether an external service accepts the key.

TROUBLESHOOTING / REFERENCE - NO MEMORIZATION REQUIRED

Service: employee-api
Project: cloud-genai-learning
Region: europe-west2
Secret reference: API_KEY -> EMPLOYEE_API_KEY -> version 1
Runtime service account:
972261256506-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com
Role identifier: roles/secretmanager.secretAccessor

If this permission error appears again, check the service's runtime
identity, its permission to read the secret, and the configured version.
An old failed revision can remain visible until a new deployment is tried.

The exact shell commands used earlier were not included in the accessible
conversation. No reconstructed commands are presented as executed steps.

HOW TO ORGANIZE FUTURE NOTES

Keep one notes file per learning day/topic, using Day-NN-Topic filenames.
Keep a matching screenshot workbook when screenshots explain a useful
configuration, error or result. Avoid recording every click.

SOURCE AND SCREENSHOT COVERAGE

Source: New_Learning_1 conversation and its accessible image attachments.
https://chatgpt.com/c/6aa66e73-10d4-83ed-b1d2-0f0f2ca78540

The companion workbook contains three original screenshots covering the
secret mapping and failed revision, successful deployment, and API result.
Separate Secret Manager/version and IAM grant screenshots were unavailable.
The permission fix is recorded from the conversation, not an IAM screenshot.
